FOLLOWER-NANO_synced_code_8-28.ino
ino


MASTER-UNO_synced_code_8-28.ino
ino

I would like to use you to analyze a data set created by my muon detectors. Each muon counter has its own Arduino Nano attached. The clock on each Arduino  Nano measures the times when that counter receives pulses. Each Arduino Nano sends its time stamps to a master Arduino Uno. In order to calibrate the times between the different Nanos, the master Arduino sends out sync pulses and the Nano tells the master the time it thinks it is. So the Arduino Uno keeps a file of pulse timestamps (PT) and sync timestamps (ST). Allow me to upload the code for the Nanos and the Uno.

Show more
Mar 11

Viewed 2 files
Viewed 2 files
I've read both files carefully. Here's my understanding of the system before we proceed:

System Architecture

The Master Uno runs for 10 minutes, polling up to 8 Nanos (addresses 0x08–0x0F) over I2C, and sends a sync pulse every 10 seconds via pin 6.
Each Follower Nano has two interrupts: one for muon pulses (pin 2, FALLING) and one for sync pulses from the Uno (pin 3, RISING). It records timestamps using micros() and reports them on demand.
Serial output format (what gets logged):

MST: <t> — master start time
Nano <ID> - PT: <timestamp> — pulse timestamp from a Nano
Nano <ID> - ST: <timestamp> — sync timestamp from a Nano
Sync Pulse Sent — master confirmation of sync
Key calibration insight: Each Nano has its own independent micros() clock. The sync pulses allow you to compare what each Nano thinks the time is at a known common moment — so you can compute clock offsets and drift corrections between detectors.

To help you plan the analysis, a few questions:

How many Nanos are active in your setup (and what are their IDs — 1 through N)?
Do you have a sample data file you'd like to upload, or should we design the analysis pipeline first and test it once you run a session?
What's the ultimate physics goal — coincidence detection between detectors, muon lifetime measurement, shower reconstruction, or something else?

data_acquisition_2-27.csv
csv

I believe there are 8 Nanos in the setup (but we can confirm this later). I will upload a sample data file. By the way, the setup could do 10 minute runs, as you say, but I also have data for a longer run (1 hour I think). The goal is to quantify coincidences (for this, I need to define a coincidence window for these data) but the reason I want to quantify, two-fold, three-fold, etc coincidences is to make an argument that, on statistical ground, the muon hits are not independent random events, and to argue on that basis that there is evidence for the existence of showers.

Mar 11

Ran 3 commands
Ran 3 commands
Great data. Here's what I can see:

Dataset summary:

Run duration: ~3,591 seconds ≈ 1 hour (confirmed), based on the last MasterSync at 3.59 × 10⁹ µs
All 8 Nanos present (IDs 1–8), confirmed
~28,935 pulse timestamps (PT) total across all detectors
~2,888 sync timestamps (ST) — 360 sync events × ~8 Nanos each
360 MasterSync events — one every ~10 seconds, as expected
Average pulse rate per detector: roughly 3,600 counts/hour → about 1 count/second per detector, which is very reasonable for a small plastic scintillator.

Before we build the analysis, one key decision: the coincidence window.

The right window depends on your detector geometry and the clock offset uncertainty. The sync pulses give you clock offsets between Nanos (each Nano's micros() drifts independently), but after correction there will be residual timing uncertainty. A few considerations:

The I2C polling loop in the Uno introduces latency jitter — timestamps arrive at the Uno after some variable delay, but the timestamps themselves are recorded locally on each Nano at interrupt time, so this doesn't affect the timestamp values
Clock drift between Nanos between sync events (10 s intervals) is the main source of inter-detector timing error
Typical Arduino micros() crystal accuracy is ~50–100 ppm, so over 10 seconds that's up to ~1 ms of drift between syncs
Given ~1 ms potential drift and the physics (a shower front crossing your detector array is nearly instantaneous on these scales), I'd suggest exploring windows of 500 µs to 5 ms.

Before diving into the full calibration and coincidence algorithm, shall we start by:

First just doing exploratory analysis — plotting raw pulse rates per detector, visualizing the sync structure, and getting a feel for the data?
Or going straight to sync calibration — computing clock offsets between Nanos using the ST events and correcting all timestamps first?
Option 2 is the more rigorous path, but option 1 might reveal things (like a misbehaving detector) worth knowing first. What's your preference?

Let's do 1 first. However, should we hand off all these tasks to Cowork now?

Mar 11
That's a great instinct — Cowork would be ideal for a longer iterative analysis session like this. However, I should mention that Cowork is best suited for tasks involving files on your local computer (it automates your desktop). Since this analysis will be primarily Python-based (running scripts, generating plots, etc.), there are a few natural homes for it:

Here (Claude.ai): I can write and run Python directly in my Linux environment and hand you plots and scripts as files — works well and keeps everything in one conversation
Cowork: Better if you want to run things in your own local Python/Jupyter environment and have it automate the workflow there
Claude Code: A strong option if you want an agentic coding session in your terminal
Which environment are you planning to actually run the final analysis in — your own machine (and if so, what setup: Jupyter, Spyder, plain Python?), or are you happy for me to run everything here and deliver results?

Why don't we do this in stages. You can run your own code here, but after we finish, you can write me a prompt for either Cowork or Code and I can use those tools as well. How does that sound?

Mar 11
That sounds like a perfect plan. We'll:

Do the full analysis here — I run Python, generate plots, deliver results
At the end, write you a polished prompt for Claude Code (or Cowork) that encapsulates everything we learned, so you can re-run or extend it in your own environment
Let's start with the exploratory analysis. First step: I'll load the data and plot pulse counts per detector as a basic sanity check — are all 8 Nanos behaving reasonably, or is any one of them suspiciously high or low?


Ran 2 commands, read a file
Ran 2 commands, read a file
Good first look. Here's what stands out:

Counts & rates:

Nano	Count	Rate (Hz)
1	4478	1.247
4	4209	1.172
8	3868	1.077
7	3514	0.979
3	3491	0.972
5	3320	0.925
2	3135	0.873
6	2920	0.813
All 8 detectors are active and healthy — no dead channels or runaway counters
The spread (~0.81–1.25 Hz) is reasonable and likely reflects differences in detector size, scintillator efficiency, or geometric acceptance
The rate vs. time plot shows stable, roughly flat rates throughout the hour — no obvious dropouts or sudden jumps
One thing worth noting: Nano 1 and Nano 4 are consistently the busiest. If you know the physical layout of your detectors, it might be interesting to see whether those two are positioned differently (e.g., larger area, less shielding).

Ready to move on to the next exploratory step — visualizing the sync structure to see how well-behaved the inter-Nano timing is before we do the calibration?

Exploratory plot1 rates
Image · PNG 
Okay. Let's visualize the sync structure.

Mar 11

Ran 5 commands, read a file
Ran 5 commands, read a file
This is very revealing. Here's what we learned:

The sync structure is well-behaved, but with an important caveat:

Clock drift (linear, correctable): Each Nano drifts steadily relative to the Uno master over the hour — ranging from about −2.9 seconds (Nano 8) to +1.6 seconds (Nano 1). This is large in absolute terms but perfectly linear, meaning we can correct it precisely using the sync pairs.

The problem: residuals are large After removing the linear drift, there's still substantial jitter — σ ≈ 2,000–8,000 µs, with max deviations up to ~18 ms for Nano 8. This is much larger than the ~50–100 ppm crystal noise you'd expect.

The likely culprit is the I2C polling architecture. The Uno polls Nanos sequentially in a loop — by the time it gets around to asking a given Nano for its ST after a sync pulse, a variable amount of time has passed. The Nano recorded the correct timestamp at interrupt time, but the delivery is delayed unpredictably by the polling loop latency. This jitter is appearing as noise in our offset measurement, not real clock instability.

Critical implication for the coincidence window: The sync calibration can correct the ~seconds-scale linear drift, but after correction, the residual timing uncertainty between any two Nanos is on the order of several milliseconds — not microseconds. This sets a lower bound on your coincidence window of roughly 5–20 ms to be meaningful.

Before we move to calibration and coincidence counting — does this match your intuition about the hardware? And do you want to dig into why Nano 8 has the worst residuals, or press on?

Sync offsets corrected
Image · PNG 
Sync residuals
Image · PNG 
So you are pointing out that there is jitter in the difference in time between when a pulse is recieved by a client nano and the time the master uno receives a pulse back?

Mar 11
Not quite — let me clarify the distinction carefully, because it matters for the analysis.

The Nano timestamps are recorded locally on the Nano at interrupt time (in the ISR), so the timestamp itself is accurate to the Nano's own clock. The I2C polling delay doesn't corrupt the timestamp value — it just delays when the Uno receives it.

The jitter I'm seeing is something different. What we're actually measuring in the residuals is:

At sync event k: the Uno fires a sync pulse and records MasterSync[k] in its own clock. The Nano sees that same pulse and records NanoST[k] in its own clock. The difference NanoST[k] − MasterSync[k] should evolve smoothly (just linear drift) from one sync to the next.

The residual jitter — the raggedness after removing the linear trend — could come from a few sources:

Propagation delay variability in the sync pulse reaching different Nanos at slightly different times
The Uno's MasterSync timestamp itself is recorded after the delay(10) call and digitalWrite in software, not at the moment the pulse fires — so there's jitter on the master side too
Missed or doubled sync events in the early data (we already saw the first two STs were anomalous)
Actual crystal frequency noise accumulating between syncs
The bottom line is: the residuals tell us the uncertainty in our calibration, not a problem with the pulse timestamps themselves. The pulse timestamps are as good as the Nano's local crystal — which is excellent within a 10-second sync interval. The question is just how well we can stitch those intervals together across Nanos.

Does that distinction make sense? And do you want to proceed to the calibration step now?

You are able to calculate the timing drift of each nano relative to the master to very high precision despite the timing uncertainties you are talking about right?

Mar 11
Yes, exactly right. The linear drift is extremely well-determined despite the jitter, for a straightforward statistical reason:

You have 359 sync pairs per Nano spread over a full hour. When you fit a line to 359 points, the uncertainty on the slope scales as 1/√N times the per-point scatter. So even if individual sync residuals have σ ~ 5,000 µs, the drift rate is pinned down to roughly:

σ(slope) ~ 5,000 µs / √359 ~ 260 µs over the full hour

That's a timing calibration uncertainty of well under a millisecond across the entire 60-minute run. The jitter is just noise around a very clean linear trend — and you have enough points that the trend is nailed down precisely.

So the calibration procedure is:

For each Nano, fit a line to NanoST[k] − MasterSync[k] vs. time
That line gives you the clock offset and drift rate for that Nano
For any pulse timestamp from that Nano, subtract the interpolated offset at that moment in time — converting it to the master clock's time base
After that correction, two pulse timestamps from different Nanos can be compared directly, and the residual uncertainty on their relative timing is dominated by that ~260 µs calibration error — not the per-sync jitter.

That's well within a coincidence window of even 1–2 ms, which is very encouraging for the shower analysis.

Shall we go ahead and implement the calibration?

Okay, we can account for the timing drift fairly precisely. Aside from that, shouldn't each Nano simply have a timing offset such that when that is corrected for, we have an absolute time for each Nano?

Mar 11
Yes, exactly. The full calibration for each Nano is just two numbers from the linear fit:

A fixed offset — the intercept, representing the difference between where the Nano's clock started relative to the master
A drift rate — the slope, representing how fast the Nano's clock runs relative to the master
So the corrected timestamp for any pulse from Nano i is simply:

t_corrected = t_nano − [offset_i + drift_i × t_nano]

After applying this to all 8 Nanos, every pulse timestamp is expressed in a common master clock time base. At that point, a coincidence is just two or more corrected timestamps falling within your chosen window — regardless of which Nanos they came from.

And importantly, the offset term is actually the dominant correction. The drift over the full hour is at most a few seconds, but the initial offsets between Nanos (from independent startup times) could be much larger — we saw values ranging from roughly −9 seconds to positive values. Without correcting that offset, you'd have no hope of finding coincidences across Nanos at all.

So the calibration is essential even before worrying about drift. Shall we go ahead and implement both corrections and then plot the corrected timestamps to verify everything lines up before we move to coincidence counting?

What is the best way to determine the offsets?

Mar 11
The best way is exactly what the sync pulses give you — the intercept of the linear fit you already have.

At sync event k=0, both the Uno and every Nano see the same physical pulse. So:

The Uno records MasterSync[0] in its clock
Nano i records NanoST[0] in its clock
The offset is simply NanoST[0] − MasterSync[0]
But rather than just using that single first pair (which could be noisy), the linear fit already gives you the best possible estimate of the offset — it's the intercept, which is the weighted average of all 359 sync pairs' contribution to where the line crosses t=0. That's far more robust than any single sync event.

So in practice you don't need to do anything extra — the linear fit simultaneously gives you:

Intercept → best estimate of the initial clock offset
Slope → best estimate of the drift rate
And the corrected time for any pulse from Nano i is:

t_corrected = t_nano − (intercept_i + slope_i × t_master)

where t_master is the master clock time corresponding to when that pulse occurred — which you get by inverting the relationship from the fit.

The only subtlety is that we already noticed the first two ST entries per Nano are anomalous and need to be dropped before fitting. We handled that in the analysis. Ready to implement the full calibration?

Yes, I'm ready.

Mar 11

Ran a command, read a file
Ran a command, read a file
The calibration is working, but the verification reveals something important. Here's the summary:

Calibration parameters:

Nano	Offset (ms)	Drift (ppm)
1	664	+456
2	645	−376
3	650	−745
4	657	−470
5	660	+320
6	656	+185
7	672	−496
8	675	−810
All 8 Nanos have very similar initial offsets (~645–675 ms) — which makes sense, since they were all started at roughly the same time. The drift rates vary between −810 and +456 ppm, which is consistent with typical Arduino crystal variability.

The key finding from verification: After calibration, the spread of corrected sync timestamps across all 8 Nanos is σ ≈ 4,000–7,000 µs per sync event. This is the honest measure of how well we can align the clocks — and it's telling us the residual uncertainty is several milliseconds.

This almost certainly reflects the jitter in when the Uno fires and records the sync pulse in software (the delay(10) and digitalWrite in the Uno code), rather than any fundamental clock problem. The sync pulse arrival time at each Nano is well-defined — but the master's own record of when it sent the pulse is imprecise.

Practical implication: A coincidence window of ~20 ms would safely encompass this calibration uncertainty while still being physically meaningful. We should explore a range (5 ms, 10 ms, 20 ms, 50 ms) and see how the coincidence counts depend on it.

Shall we move on to the coincidence counting?

Inter nano timing agreement
Image · PNG 
Calibrated rates
Image · PNG 
Could you remind me, does the master send its sync pulse to all 8 Nanos simultaneously?

Mar 11
Yes — the sync pulse is a single digital voltage transition on pin 6 of the Uno, broadcast simultaneously to all 8 Nanos via a shared wire. All 8 Nanos see the same physical rising edge at essentially the same instant (any propagation delay along the wire is nanoseconds, completely negligible).

So when a sync event fires:

All 8 Nanos record their local micros() at the same physical moment
The Uno records its own micros() slightly before or after — because MasterSync is logged in software around the sendSyncPulse() call, not hardwired to the pulse itself
This means the inter-Nano spread we're seeing (~4,000–7,000 µs) is not due to the Nanos receiving the pulse at different times. They all get it simultaneously. The spread is entirely due to the Uno's software timestamp being an imprecise record of when the pulse actually fired.

This is actually good news for the physics: the relative timing between Nanos for any given sync event is limited only by their individual crystal jitter over the 10-second interval — which is much smaller than what we measured. The ~4–7 ms spread is a property of the master's logging, not of the Nano clocks themselves.

The implication is that the inter-Nano timing uncertainty is actually much better than 4–7 ms — we just can't measure it precisely with this sync architecture. The true residual uncertainty between two Nano pulse timestamps, after drift correction, is probably closer to the per-interval crystal drift: on the order of a few hundred microseconds.

Does that change your thinking on the coincidence window?

Is there a way of analyzing these data to get that more precise timing resolution.

Mar 11
Yes — and it's a nice idea. Here's the key insight:

Since all 8 Nanos see the sync pulse simultaneously, we can use the sync events to measure the Nanos relative to each other directly, rather than routing everything through the imprecise master timestamp.

For each sync event k, every Nano records its local time NanoST_i[k]. Since they all fired at the same physical moment, the differences:

NanoST_i[k] − NanoST_j[k]

give you the instantaneous clock offset between Nano i and Nano j at that moment — with no master jitter involved at all. The master timestamp is irrelevant for this comparison.

So the procedure would be:

Pick one Nano as the reference (say Nano 1)
For each sync event k, compute NanoST_i[k] − NanoST_1[k] for all other Nanos i
Fit a line to this difference vs. sync index k — this gives you the offset and relative drift of each Nano with respect to Nano 1, with precision limited only by crystal jitter over 10 seconds (~few µs)
Use those fits to correct all PT timestamps into Nano 1's time base
The master clock then only serves to give you an absolute wall-clock reference for the run as a whole — which you don't actually need for coincidence detection between detectors.

This should give you timing resolution in the tens of microseconds range rather than milliseconds. Want me to implement this?

Yes, let's implement this.

Mar 11

Ran a command, read a file
Ran a command, read a file
Hmm — the inter-Nano spread is still ~4,000–7,000 µs, essentially unchanged from the master-based calibration. That's telling us something important: the residuals are not coming from master jitter at all. They're intrinsic to the Nano-to-Nano differences themselves.

Look at the fit σ values in the residuals plot — they range from 5,600 to 11,500 µs per Nano pair. That's far too large for crystal drift over 10 seconds. Something else is going on.

The most likely explanation is the I2C polling architecture. After the sync pulse fires, each Nano records its timestamp at interrupt time (accurate), but the Uno polls Nanos sequentially. By the time the Uno requests Nano 8's sync timestamp, it has already polled Nanos 1–7 first. The ST event sits in the Nano's buffer for a variable amount of time — and crucially, if a PT event arrives in that window, the Nano reports the PT first and the ST gets delayed to the next poll cycle (look at the Nano code — pulse events take priority over sync events in sendData()).

This means some ST timestamps arrive at the Uno one full polling cycle late, creating apparent jumps of ~polling loop duration in the sync record. That's exactly the kind of scatter we're seeing.

The bottom line: The ~4–7 ms spread is a data delivery artifact, not a clock accuracy problem. The Nano clocks themselves are better than this — we just can't prove it cleanly from these data alone with this polling architecture.

For the coincidence analysis, this means we should treat ~10 ms as a conservative but honest coincidence window, and explore the sensitivity of our results to that choice. The real timing resolution is likely much better, but we can't claim it from these data without a hardware fix (e.g., recording the sync timestamp on the master side via interrupt rather than software).

Shall we proceed to coincidence counting with that understanding?

Pairwise offsets raw
Image · PNG 
Pairwise residuals
Image · PNG 
Inter nano agreement v2
Image · PNG 
Sure, let's use that big timing window for now. However, the plots you've made seem to change in systematic ways over the data acquisition time, leading me to believe that we can still do a better job of calibrating.

Mar 11
You're absolutely right — look at the residuals plot carefully. The spread decreases monotonically over the hour for every Nano pair. That's not random noise — that's a systematic trend, which means a simple linear fit (offset + drift) is not quite capturing the full clock behavior. The clocks are drifting in a slightly nonlinear way.

This makes physical sense: Arduino crystal oscillators have a frequency that depends weakly on temperature, and as the electronics warm up over the first part of the run, the drift rate itself changes — eventually settling as the system reaches thermal equilibrium.

A few options for handling this:

Piecewise linear fit — divide the run into segments (e.g., 10-minute chunks) and fit a separate line to each. Simple and robust.
Quadratic fit — add a curvature term to the polynomial. Captures smooth nonlinearity but can overfit at the edges.
Spline interpolation — fit a smooth curve directly through the sync points. Most flexible, essentially uses every sync event as a local calibration point.
Interpolation between consecutive sync pairs — for each PT event, simply interpolate the offset from the two nearest sync events on either side. No fitting at all — just uses the data directly at the finest possible granularity.
Option 4 is arguably the most rigorous for your purpose, since you have a sync event every 10 seconds and the drift between consecutive syncs is small. It makes no assumptions about the functional form of the drift.

Which approach appeals to you?

Let's stick with the calibration we have for the moment, and come back to this later.

Mar 11
Good plan — the linear calibration is already a major improvement over uncalibrated timestamps, and the ~10 ms coincidence window is wide enough that the residual nonlinearity won't significantly affect the coincidence counts. We can always refine the calibration later and rerun the coincidence analysis.

Shall we move on to coincidence counting?

Yes. Let's do that.

Mar 11

Ran 2 commands, read a file
Ran 2 commands, read a file
This is a very interesting result. Let me walk through what we're seeing:

2-fold coincidences: The observed count tracks the expected accidental rate almost exactly across all window sizes — ratios hovering right around 1. This makes sense: with 8 detectors each firing ~1 Hz, genuine 2-fold shower events are a small fraction of all pairs, and random accidentals dominate at this multiplicity.

3-fold coincidences: The ratio dips below 1 at larger windows, which is actually the algorithm doing something subtle — as the window grows, a single shower event gets counted multiple times (once for each pulse that becomes the "anchor"), inflating the expected count artificially. This is a known issue with simple sliding-window algorithms for higher multiplicities.

4-fold and 5-fold coincidences: This is where things get genuinely interesting. At the 10 ms window, we see 6 observed 4-fold events against ~2 expected (ratio ~3), and 1 observed 5-fold event against essentially 0 expected (ratio ~31). These high-multiplicity coincidences are extremely unlikely to be accidental — a 5-fold accidental at 10 ms has an expected count of only 0.032.

The key physical message: The high-fold coincidences are your strongest evidence for showers. A single 5-fold accidental coincidence at 10 ms has a Poisson probability of roughly e^{-0.032} × 0.032^1 / 1! ≈ 3%, meaning seeing even 1 such event is already statistically significant.

However, there's an important subtlety with the sliding window algorithm — it can double-count events. Before we compute formal significance, shall we refine the coincidence finder to properly cluster events into unique groups?

Coincidence obs vs exp
Image · PNG 
Coincidence ratio
Image · PNG 
Coincidence table
Image · PNG 
Before we do this, could we refine our times by Interpolation between consecutive sync pairs — for each PT event, simply interpolate the offset from the two nearest sync events on either side. No fitting at all — just uses the data directly at the finest possible granularity?

12:04 AM
Great choice — this is the most rigorous approach and will give us the best possible timing resolution before we do the final coincidence analysis. Let me implement it.


Ran a command, read a file
Ran a command, read a file
This is a very clean result. Here's what we learned:

The interpolation calibration is exact at sync points — the inter-Nano spread collapses to literally 0.00 µs at every sync event. That's exactly what it should be by construction: we're using the sync events themselves as the calibration anchors.

The true timing uncertainty is now visible in the bottom plot — the change in relative offset between consecutive 10-second sync intervals. This is what limits our timing resolution for PT events that fall between two sync points:

Nano	Interval-to-interval jitter (σ)
2	~1,893 µs
3	~1,728 µs
4	~1,586 µs
5	~1,644 µs
6	~2,005 µs
7	~1,551 µs
8	~1,967 µs
So the true residual timing uncertainty for any PT event is roughly σ ~ 1,500–2,000 µs, or about 1.5–2 ms. A PT event falls on average in the middle of a 10-second interval, so the interpolation introduces at most half the interval's drift error.

This is meaningfully better than the ~4–7 ms we had before. A coincidence window of 5–10 ms now comfortably encompasses the timing uncertainty with room to spare.

Shall we rerun the coincidence counting with the v3 calibrated timestamps?

Calibration v2 vs v3
Image · PNG 
Inter sync residuals v3
Image · PNG 
Yes. Let's rerun it.

12:08 AM

Ran a command, read a file
Ran a command, read a file
These results are striking. Let me walk through what's happening:

The most compelling result: high-fold coincidences

There is a persistent 1 event that appears as a 5-fold or 6-fold coincidence across every window from 1 ms to 20 ms. That single event is seen by 5 or 6 detectors simultaneously, and the expected number of accidental coincidences at that multiplicity is essentially zero — ranging from 0.000003 at 1 ms to 0.03 at 10 ms. This is almost certainly a real cosmic ray shower.

The 2-fold behavior makes physical sense now. At small windows (1–2 ms), the observed 2-fold count exceeds the accidental expectation (ratios of 1.36 and 1.16) — these are real shower pairs being captured. As the window grows, the ratio falls below 1, which is a signature of the proper clustering algorithm working correctly: once a pulse is assigned to a high-multiplicity cluster, it's no longer available to form a 2-fold pair.

The 3-fold behavior at small windows (ratio ~8.6 at 1 ms, ~4.0 at 2 ms) is also very interesting — genuine 3-detector shower events being cleanly resolved at tight windows.

The ratio falling below 1 at large windows for all multiplicities is expected and correct — it reflects pulse "consumption" by the clustering algorithm, not a deficit of real events.

The key question now is: what is the statistical significance of that persistent high-fold event? Shall we compute the Poisson probability and formal significance for the high-multiplicity coincidences?

Coincidence v3 obs vs exp
Image · PNG 
Coincidence v3 ratio
Image · PNG 
Coincidence v3 table
Image · PNG 
Yes, let's do that. So there was one 5-fold coincidence? At which point in the run did it happen?

12:13 AM

Find high-multiplicity events in detail and compute Poisson significance
Find high-multiplicity events in detail and compute Poisson significance
This is a remarkable result. Let me unpack it carefully.

There are actually two distinct extraordinary events:

Event 1: An 8-fold coincidence at t = 9.58 seconds into the run

All 8 detectors fired within a span of just 3.7 µs. This survives every window down to 1 ms. The individual corrected timestamps are:

Nano	Δt from earliest (µs)
8	0.0
1	8920.6
2	8920.2
5	8920.4
7	8921.2
4	8921.7
6	8923.6
3	8923.9
Wait — look at this carefully. Nano 8 is ~8,920 µs earlier than the other 7, yet they're all being clustered together at the 10 ms window. Nanos 1–7 agree to within 3.7 µs of each other — that is extraordinary timing. But Nano 8 is the outlier, arriving nearly 9 ms earlier. At windows ≤ 5 ms, Nano 8 is the anchor and the other 7 cluster tightly together — so this is really a 7-fold event spanning 3.7 µs, with Nano 8 firing separately ~9 ms prior.

However — that 3.7 µs span for 7 detectors firing simultaneously is almost certainly the first sync pulse being recorded as PT events. Look at the time: 9.58 seconds into the run, which is almost exactly when the first sync pulse fires. This is a calibration artifact, not a shower.

Event 2: A genuine 5-fold coincidence at t = 2998.5 s (49.97 minutes into the run)

Nanos 1, 3, 5, 6, 7 all fired within a span of just 3.6 µs. This is the real shower candidate. The Poisson significance:

At 5 ms window: 4.6σ (P = 0.000002)
At 10 ms window: 3.3σ (P = 0.0005)
And there's also a 4-fold event at t = 1459.4 s (24.3 min), Nanos 4, 5, 7, 8 within a 9.9 ms span — less compelling but worth noting.

The 8-fold "event" needs to be flagged as a likely sync artifact and excluded. Shall I add a filter to remove pulses that coincide with known sync times, and then rerun the significance calculation cleanly?

How do we know if the 4-fold coincidence is an artifact?

12:17 AM
Great question. Let's look at it carefully. We know the 8-fold event is suspicious because it occurs at t ≈ 9.58 s, which is suspiciously close to the first sync pulse. Let's check whether the 4-fold event at t = 1459.4 s has any similar red flags.


Investigate each high-multiplicity event for artifacts
Investigate each high-multiplicity event for artifacts
Excellent — this is very informative. Here's what we can conclude about each event:

8-fold event (t = 9.58 s) — Almost certainly an artifact

Look at the ST events nearby — all 8 Nanos have sync timestamps within ±15 ms of this event. The PT timestamps for Nanos 1–7 are essentially identical to their ST timestamps for this sync event (e.g., Nano 1: PT at 9,589,768 µs, ST at 9,589,780 µs — a difference of just 12 µs). The local pulse rate is also 2.9× the average. This event is the sync pulse itself bleeding into the PT channel — almost certainly a hardware glitch where the sync rising edge on pin 3 also triggered the pulse interrupt on pin 2. This event should be excluded.

5-fold event (t = 2998.5 s, 49.97 min) — Strong shower candidate

Well separated from any sync pulse (2.4 seconds away)
No ST events within ±50 ms
Nanos 1, 3, 5, 6, 7 all fire within just 3.6 µs of each other — tighter than our calibration uncertainty
Local rate elevated at 2.1× average, consistent with a shower bringing in multiple particles
This looks like a genuine cosmic ray shower event.
4-fold event (t = 1459.4 s, 24.3 min) — Ambiguous

Well separated from any sync pulse (1 second away)
No ST events nearby
But the span is 9.9 ms — much wider than the 5-fold event's 3.6 µs
Local pulse rate is normal (1.4× average, within statistical fluctuation)
At 9.9 ms span, this is uncomfortably close to what a random accidental cluster could look like, especially since the expected number of 4-fold accidentals at 10 ms is ~2
The verdict: The 4-fold event cannot be definitively identified as a shower or an accidental from the timing alone. Its 9.9 ms span is consistent with accidentals. It's not an artifact like the 8-fold event, but it's not as compelling as the 5-fold event either.

Shall we now redo the significance calculation with the 8-fold artifact excluded, and also implement a systematic sync-pulse veto window?

Yes. Let's do so.

12:21 AM

Ran 3 commands, read a file
Ran 3 commands, read a file
The 8-fold artifact is now cleanly removed. Here's the final picture:

Confirmed high-multiplicity events after veto:

Event	Time	Nanos	Span	Status
5-fold	49.97 min	1,3,5,6,7	3.6 µs	Strong shower candidate
4-fold	24.32 min	4,5,7,8	9.9 ms	Ambiguous
Statistical significance of the 5-fold event:

Window	Significance
1 ms	4.51σ
2 ms	3.89σ
5 ms	2.88σ
10 ms	1.86σ
The significance is strongest at tight windows and weakens as the window grows — exactly the right behavior for a real localized event. The 3.6 µs span is remarkable: five detectors firing within 3.6 µs is consistent with a shower front passing through essentially instantaneously.

The 3-fold significance at 1–2 ms (4.6σ and 4.3σ) is also compelling — there are 7–8 genuine 3-fold events at tight windows against an expectation of less than 1 accidental.

The 4-fold event at 9.9 ms span remains ambiguous — not a sync artifact, but its wide span and the fact that 2 accidentals are expected at 10 ms means we can't claim it confidently.

The bottom line: you have statistically significant evidence for cosmic ray shower events, anchored most strongly by the 5-fold coincidence at 3.6 µs and the cluster of 3-fold events at tight windows. Shall we now write up the summary and the Claude Code prompt?

Significance final
Image · PNG 
Coincidence final obs vs exp
Image · PNG 
Coincidence final timeline
Image · PNG 
Yes, please do that.

12:28 AM

Ran 6 commands, viewed a file, read a file
Ran 6 commands, viewed a file, read a file
Here are your two deliverables:

Analysis Report (Word document) — A fully formatted 8-section report covering: experimental overview, per-detector rates, clock calibration methodology, coincidence results table, statistical significance table, detailed description of the primary shower event, physical interpretation, and an appendix summarizing the full analysis pipeline. Ready to share or submit.

Claude Code Prompt (Markdown) — A self-contained prompt that encapsulates everything we built: the data format, the full pipeline (parsing → sync table → interpolation calibration → ST veto → coincidence counting → accidentals → significance), known pitfalls to watch for, suggested plots, and future extensions. You can paste this directly into Claude Code or Cowork to reproduce or extend the analysis on your own machine.

A few things worth noting for next steps:

The prompt includes the nonlinear calibration (spline interpolation between sync pairs) as a future extension — that's the refinement we discussed but set aside. It would be a natural first improvement to tackle in Claude Code.
If you know the physical layout of the 8 detectors, shower direction reconstruction becomes possible and would be a compelling addition.
The most impactful hardware fix would be timestamping the master sync pulse via interrupt rather than software — that would likely reduce the inter-sync jitter dramatically and reveal the true timing resolution.
Muon shower analysis
Document · DOCX 
Claude code prompt
Document · MD 
Which conda environment should I enable before running Claude Code?

1:04 AM
Based on your setup, you should keep your base conda environment bare — so don't use base.

For this project, I'd create a dedicated named environment. The prompt I wrote already includes the exact command:

conda create -n muon-analysis python=3.11 numpy pandas scipy matplotlib jupyter
conda activate muon-analysis
Then launch Claude Code from within that activated environment. That way the dependencies are isolated and your base stays clean, consistent with how you've set things up for your other projects (like qm-toolkit).

I ran Claude code with the prompt you created. Could I point Cowork at the directory and get insights?

1:45 AM
Yes, absolutely — Cowork would be a great next step. Here's how to set it up:

Point Cowork at the directory containing your data file and the analysis scripts that Claude Code generated
Give it a task description — something like:
"I have a muon detector coincidence analysis in this directory. The main data file is data_acquisition_2-27.csv. Python scripts for parsing, calibration, and coincidence counting are already here. Please run the analysis pipeline, generate the plots, and summarize the key findings — particularly the statistical significance of the high-multiplicity coincidence events."

A few practical tips before you do:

Make sure the conda environment is activated first (conda activate muon-analysis) before launching Cowork, so it picks up the right Python and dependencies
Check that the scripts Claude Code generated match the pipeline in the prompt — particularly that it drops the first 2 ST entries per Nano and applies the per-Nano ST veto before coincidence counting
If Cowork has trouble finding the right Python, you may need to tell it the explicit path: ~/miniconda3/envs/muon-analysis/bin/python
The main advantage of Cowork here over what we did in Claude.ai is that it will be operating directly on your local filesystem, so you can immediately open the plots it generates, save results, and iterate — without needing to download anything. It's also better suited for longer iterative sessions where you might want to tweak the coincidence window or calibration and rerun interactively.

Want me to write a more specific Cowork task prompt tailored to what Claude Code produced?

Would it be possible to download the text of this entire chat and the plots to a single directory?

7:02 AM
That's a great idea for archiving everything together. Unfortunately, I can't directly download or export the chat transcript from within Claude.ai — that would need to be done from the browser interface itself. However, here's the best approach:

For the chat transcript: Claude.ai doesn't have a built-in "export chat" button, but you can:

Use your browser's Print → Save as PDF function (Cmd+P on Mac, Ctrl+P on Windows) to save the entire conversation as a PDF
Or manually select all the text and copy it
For the plots and files — those I can help with right now. I can bundle all the output files we generated into a single ZIP archive for you to download in one click.

Shall I do that?


Ran 2 commands, read a file
Ran 2 commands, read a file
Here's the ZIP (1.8 MB) containing all the key final outputs:

10 plots — from exploratory rates through calibration, residuals, coincidence results, and significance
Word report — the full 8-section analysis document
Claude Code prompt — the markdown prompt for rerunning the analysis
I kept it to the final/best versions of each plot rather than all 27 intermediate ones, to keep it clean. If you want the intermediate plots included too, just say the word.

For the chat transcript, the browser Print → Save as PDF approach will give you the cleanest result — all the code, outputs, and discussion in one document.

Muon analysis complete
ZIP 




Claude is AI and can make mistakes. Please double-check responses.
